# Online Media Copyright and Censorship in the US

*September 30, 2021* 

As Kirk Hammett fires away his performance on Twitch in front of thousands of online audiences, instead of the classic metal riffs that the legendary guitarist is known for, the viewers were hit with royalty-free 8-bit folk music. On February 19, the online Metallica concert became another victim of the US’s music copyright system: fearing a legal takedown request for steaming copyrighted music online, Twitch decided to block Metallica’s performance on its platform even though it has an official collaboration.

While music streaming platforms like Twitch and Spotify are relatively young, the laws on copyright have existed as far back as the invention of recorders. The US copyright law grants copyright owners a set of “exclusive rights”, including reproduction, distribution, and public performance. It also outlined some exceptions to the exclusivity, such as “fair use” allowing certain educational or research usage, or “first sale” which limit copyright claims in purchased music.  When music was only circulating in physical forms – CD, DVD, cassettes, vinyl, etc. – the laws have few ambiguities. With the arrival of the digital age, however, the laws became contested as the cost of reproduction and distribution approached zero. The most well-known legal battle was – ironically for Metallica - Metallica vs. Napster in 2000. The metal band, claiming the p2p sharing service illegally distributed their music for commercial purposes, sued to take down all of Metallica’s music from Napster.  The influential case marked the beginning of music industry’s decades-long crusade against online piracy, with Hollywood soon joining the effort. In addition to endless propaganda and lawsuit against file-sharing websites and p2p networks such as BitTorrent, record labels and film studios have been maintaining a huge presence in DC to urge policymakers for more stringent online copyright laws: from 2000 to 2010, record label association RIAA spent $90 million on lobbying effort, plus $50 million in legal campaigns against file-sharing services.  The result manifested in 2010 when the congress proposed the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA).

Introduced in 2011 and immediately receiving bipartisan support, SOPA greatly expanded the power of the US government against copyright infringement. It expanded the liability of copyright infringement to ISP, search engines, and even DNS registrars if they do not block the infringing service in the US. It also increased the penalties on streaming copyrighted content such that the activity could be prosecuted by criminal laws.  Amongst its many weaknesses including vague legal definitions and disruption to the Internet’s infrastructure, the bill’s most troubling aspect was that it put the burden of censorship onto digital platforms who host or index user contents. YouTube, for example, would be challenged in court for leaving out a video containing copyright infringing music for more than 5 days. With more than 720,000 hours of videos uploaded every day , YouTube would need to ramp up its censorship effort considerably to avoid lawsuits, which is not only extremely costly for the company but also discourages users from uploading contents such as cover songs and remixes that dominated the online music creativity scene. The bill would no doubt handicap all online platforms relying on user-generated content as the business model would no longer be viable under such high costs from legal complications and internal censorship. Thankfully, the collective effort of technology companies, activists, and legal experts made sure that SOPA was officially shelved in early 2012. 

However, the end of an overarching bill does not mean that media on the Internet is free from censorship. With DMCA still in effect, online platforms are off the hook from storing user-uploaded copyright infringing content, but they are still required to respond to copyright takedown notice to maintain their legal immunity. Creative use of these DMCA takedown requests, therefore, became a new tool of censorship. In 2017, YouTube received over 2.5 million DMCA takedown requests, together requesting the removal of 7 million videos. YouTube claimed that most of these videos were removed, rejecting only 300,000 or 5% of these requests on the ground of insufficient information or abuse.  These illegitimate takedown notices, often generated in bulk by software, can contain completely non-sensical copyright claims whose purpose is to silence free speech.  They are often successful since service providers default to complying with the request to free themselves from liability. The appeal processes against these illegitimate requests vary from each service, but most involve a lengthy court process that most average users of the Internet could not afford. On rare occasions, the owner does go to court against giant copyright collectives who file false takedown requests, as Stephanie Lenz did when Universal Music took down a video of her toddler dancing to Prince’s music.  While Lenz won in court, who held that copyright holders need to be more cautious when issuing takedown requests, the cost of issuing false takedown requests remains insignificant, and most requests could still be easily abused for censorship if the content owner chooses not to fight back.

Nevertheless, digital music and other media have taken up a much larger presence in the online space in recent years. Major platforms and the copyright office have implemented measures to help online creators to receive their fair share of rights from their work. YouTube’s Content ID system, for example, automatically matches content to its right holder, who then has the option to monetize from the content without censoring it. Compared to the clenched legal battle between copyright holder and user in a DMCA takedown request, this technical solution is a comfortable middle ground. The music industry has also simplified the licensing process of online music with the newly approved Music Modernization Act, allowing platforms to acquire a “blanket license” for all music in the Mechanical License Collective who then automatically distribute the royalty. Still, the Metallica fiasco on Twitch proves that the “chilling effect” that copyright laws have on the Internet is not going away soon. 
