# Isolating the US Internet is a Terrible Idea

*September 26, 2021* 

In spring 2020, when clients of SolarWinds conducted a regular update of the network monitoring tool Orion, what they downloaded was a compromised version of the software developed by Russia backed hacker. The software allowed hackers to steal credentials, gain control of the computer, and transmit sensitive data back to the hackers. Around 18,000 SolarWinds clients, including high-profile targets such as the US Department of Homeland Security and Microsoft, were affected, and the scope of the attack is not yet fully discovered even today. 

The SolarWinds attack is just one of the many state-sponsored cyberattacks targeting the US. At the US digital border, packets carrying phishing websites and malicious codes flow in every minute to probe the security measures of American companies and government agencies. What if, one might ask, the US could patrol these borders as we do at the Mexican border, catch the bad packets, and throw them out?

Unlike the physical border, the answer is much simpler for the digital one: filtering the traffic will not work. The Internet’s architecture has made distinguishing “good” packets against “bad” packets impossible. With the popularization of end-to-end encryption, packets arrive in layers of encryptions that would take an entire NSA’s computing power to break. With terabytes of packets crossing into the US at each submarine cable every second, scanning their content for threats would require an unrealistic amount of computation that no country could afford.  Some raise the possibility of selectively blocking traffic from countries where cyberattacks often originate, such as Russia. But with technologies such as Virtual Private Network, attackers can “launder” the packet so that it appears to have come from friendly countries. Such were the tactics of North Korean hackers, who routed attacks through France, Taiwan, and South Korea.  The border of the Internet thus can only remain undisturbed.

Some policymakers entertain an extreme and unsophisticated solution that “cuts the cord” -- severing all 150 submarine cables at the US border, effectively ending all traffic from outside, including the malicious ones. The plan would be near impossible to execute simply because of the legal consequences. Bills attempting to empower the government with an “internet kill switch” has only caused public outcries and failed. While the Communication Act of 1934 grant the president power to shut down “any facility or station for wire communication” in a state of war, cyberattacks on the scale of SolarWinds is unlikely to satisfy that prerequisite.  Invoking the law as a defensive measure against everyday cyberattacks will sure incur fierce legal reactions from private Internet Service Providers, tech companies, and the society at large. A total shutdown is therefore also not feasible given the current US legal system. 

With so many technical and non-technical hurdles to cross, why is the idea of isolating the US’s internet still floating around? Proponents of such ideas might have been inspired by China’s tight grip over its cyberspace. Contrary to popular belief, the Great Firewall is much less effective at preventing cyberattacks than it is censoring Xi’s critics. Chinese analysts claimed that China suffered from more than 2700 foreign cyberattacks in the past few years, many of which use tactics similar to the ones attacking the US.  The massive and expensive censorship apparatus inside the Great Firewall was not designed to identify ransomware or viruses: it was built to de-anonymize speech on social media and used coarse-grained filters to block foreign internet services such as Google. A trojan horse carefully disguised as a mundane software update, like the one in the SolarWinds attack, would have slipped through the Chinese border without raising suspicion. 

The isolationist mindset is against the nature of the Internet. The early architects of the Internet built the net to be inclusive, interconnected, and decentralized.  While these design choices made defenses against cyberattacks difficult, the innovation and social progress they facilitated in the past decades show that the pros far outweigh the cons. The US has been trying to protect the spirit of the Internet globally by keeping governmental interventions at a minimum, and now is not the time to turn back. 
